---
title: Finding My Life's Vocation
---
> Some people die at 25 and aren't buried until 75 - Benjamin Franklin

I must have heard this quote for the first time some ten years ago and never thought for a moment it might one day apply to me. I write these words now in my 29th year of existence, now fully cognisant of the existentialist drag that accompanies the aging process. Experience has taught me some humility, and I eventually learnt I'm no more likely to avoid a dull and meaningless fate than the next person.

I once pictured myself travelling the world as a digital nomad, learning (perfectly) up to as many as 10 different languages; winning marathons and weight-lifting championships simultaneously; earning PhDs, millions of dollars and starting companies that might improve the world on a global scale; or performing guitar solos on stage in front of thousands of people. Now 4 years over-schedule, I've learnt only one other language (to a level I reluctantly call "well") having moved to one other city (albeit on the other side of the planet), worked at a handful of failed startups as a slightly better-than-average-paid software developer and have close to given up on my guitar practice entirely after performing just once in front of about 40 people. I'm currently nursing a few injuries that are holding me back from the handstands I'm so proud of being able to do and the parkour I never learnt. What happened?

### Am I a failure?
These "Batman ideals" - all centered around attaining power to do good - definitely had their talons wrapped around my naive mind and influenced the direction I would take over the course of the next 10 years - and by many measures I've made a good shot at it. However, where that raw ambition has faded away, age has left something else in its place - a more complex understanding of the world.

Looking back at these old goals, I see they were based on many faulty assumptions, some dangerous thinking and left a lot to be desired for a well-rounded life. With the knowledge I've gained the last ten years, I'm in a better position to set worthier goals for the next chapter of my life.
 - How could I (or old Ben Franklin, for that matter) have ever judged what is dull and meaningless to somebody else? Human nature is complex and our diverse tastes and attitudes are our strength as a species. This is no accident either: evolution seems to have bigger plans for us and [we're not as in-control](https://samharris.org/podcasts/211-the-nature-of-human-nature/) of ourselves as we might like. This is at first an uncomfortable thought, but it ultimately calls for more understanding and compassion for ourselves, for each other, and hints at super powers [we might be able to unlock](https://www.amazon.de/Drive-Surprising-Truth-About-Motivates/dp/1594484805) if we could only loosen our grip on each other.
 - Is having a global impact really the best way to help the world? [Many prominent thinkers](https://80000hours.org/podcast/episodes/russ-roberts-effective-altruism-empirical-research-utilitarianism/) suggest our efforts might be wasted in thinking too globally, that we understand and can solve local problems far better than global ones and that in fact we [might be doing damage](https://samharris.org/podcasts/232-inequality-revolution/) as aspiring cosmopolitans.
 - Were any of these goals made with an understanding of the [psychology of happiness and fulfillment](https://www.happinesslab.fm/)? Might the pursuit of some goals make one more miserable or lonely, and in effect reduce one's ability to pursue future goals? How does one pick worthy goals that will actually make a difference?
 - What role does luck play in the achievement of these goals? And to what degree did I ascribe luck to the success and failure of others who have aimed at similar goals?
 - What is the deeper meaning of it all? Who am I really trying to help by having a global impact? To what extent is power-for-good seeking really ego - who am I trying to impress or what am I trying to compensate for?
 - How should one set goals? How ambitious should they be? How realistic? How might I be [sabotaging myself](https://www.happinesslab.fm/season-1-episodes/dont-accentuate-the-positive) as I work towards them?
 - Are my goals really what propel me to action? Or is it action that then shapes the goals? My goals a decade ago were - fortunately - by no means static. As life has thrown me new opportunities and shown me my own shortcomings, I've slowly moved the goal posts and new things have become important to me, to the point where looking back at these old goals feels embarrassing.

Perhaps I'm just justifying my own lack of success against the goals I originally set myself. Perhaps these mental gymnastics are a clever way for my ego to defend what little it has left. However, I'd like to think that if my 19-year-old self understood some of these intricacies, I wouldn't be sitting here with the feeling I have now that there must be more to life.

The only real failure would be sticking to a bad map that obviously doesn't fit the terrain: it's time to draw a new map.

### Are goals necessary?
With all these complex questions to answer, it might seem like the act of goal-setting is somewhat pointless; that the very eschewing the rigidity of those first goals and meandering away from them is what allowed me to understand the world better.

It's no coincidence, however, that I'm writing this during the second (and remarkably colder and longer) lockdown in Germany during the Covid-19 pandemic. Without the fast pace of our "normal" lives - the new opportunities, distractions and things to look forward to - I've learnt first hand the danger of not having some guiding star to aim at.

The last two years I've felt somewhat lost in my career. This period began with me leaving a company in which I had high autonomy, mastery and a degree of purpose that I've since then not been able to fully replicate. Coupled with the hibernation of my social life during the two lockdowns here, in both periods I've stalled and dipped dangerously close to chaos, coming as close as I ever have to depression and picking up a few bad habits that I now need to learn to control.

This post and those that follow are a response to the challenges that the pandemic has presented me personally. Faced with nothing but programming alone at my desk day in, day out, it's clear to me that I need to do more than just tell rather stubborn machines what tasks they should perform on our behalf. Of course I still enjoy programming and in absolute terms couldn't be more grateful for the freedom and financial security it grants me as a career, but code is just a tool, a means to an end - and right now, that end is not clear enough for me.

The very act of researching and writing these posts has restarted my engines and provided another avenue of creativity that I seem to desperately need right now: alone the goal of trying to redefine my goals seems to offer some meaning that purely existing from day-to-day doesn't.

### Dream to dream
So given all of that, how do I intend on setting goals that make sense? Goals that take into account the complexity of the world while at the same time motivating me to get through the hard work necessary in achieving them?

That's what this series is all about. A live process; a messy research project that will feed back in on itself as I discover more about setting good goals, about what there is out there to learn and build, and about myself and what I enjoy. By the end of it, I hope to have a clear idea of what interests me most deeply and a plan of action for doing something with that knowledge - and a plan that makes sense, at that.

My strategy is rather simple and can be best summarised with the old cliched imperative: *just let go*. We all have strong preconceptions about what we should do, about what would be most sensible or what's "right", and most of my teenage goals were constrained by these beliefs about what aims are acceptable to pursue in life. But this time I'm taking a different strategy, one inspired by [Sam Harris' approach](https://youtu.be/StzNlYXnCm4?t=1625) to reading books and consuming information: if you get bored with something, just drop it and move on. There are more fields to be an expert in, more things to make, institutions to attend or people to work with than one could ever fit into a lifetime - the amount to learn is functionally infinite for any individual alive today. We need people, more than ever, to take risks and try out new things - as only then does the boundary of human knowledge expand. And the only way we'll ever have the energy to take these risks is if we're intrinsically motivated to pursue those things. So I'm going to let my moment-to-moment whims guide me on this journey; to listen to and read the things that interest me most in any given moment, and as I meander through this infinite space, patiently [wait and hope](https://www.sparknotes.com/lit/montecristo/quotes/page/5/) that my mind converges on something meaningful and actionable, on some significant optima.

And it has been. For the last year I've been reading and listening to a wide range of interesting topics and I'm starting to see common threads arise, each of which I'll dive further into. I'm also not starting from scratch: my skillset is already broad and I have an idea of what has worked for me and what hasn't in these last ten years as an adult, not to mention that I have a promising job that could allow me to explore many of these topics and be an integral part of this new chapter of my life. By aiming my discipline at the how - in writing blog posts, making podcast episodes, structuring my research and interviewing interesting people - rather than the what - say by forcing myself to stick it out with x, y or z - I hope to create an interesting career guide full of science-backed tips and tricks on finding your life's vocation.

Who knows, maybe this'll come in handy for somebody else one day too.
